In general, no invoice should be paid until
all goods are received or services performed.
Exercising your certification authority under section 34
of the Financial Administration Act (FAA)
essentially means that you pause
to attest that the goods and services you received
match the invoice.
While other people on your team may be able to make that assessment,
it is you, as the delegated manager,
who bears the weight of the accountability.
As such, you need to make sure that
the invoice is accurate – and that the financial coding
is also accurate.
Of course, you can only do this if
you have the proper authority to make that assessment.
So be sure to check that too!
Before signing off on an invoice,
the manager, usually with the help of their administrative staff,
verifies the accuracy of an invoice or claim by looking at the following elements:
The date issued – verify that the invoice was issued
on or after the order date; or, in the case of a contract,
that it was issued during the contract period.
Quantities – confirm that the items
claimed line up with the items ordered.
Taxes – validate that the amount for taxes is accurate
and has appropriate GST or PST numbers.
Supplier or payee –
make sure that their information is accurate
and that the supplier or payee is eligible for payment.
And status – verify that the invoice has not already been paid.
You may need to go back to the supplier to correct the invoice
before you can sign section 34.
Invoices must be paid within 30 days
from the time the department receives the invoice
to avoid interest charges.
Once the invoice is validated,
the manager verifies the financial coding
and approves section 34.
This approval is done with a signature either on paper
or electronically, depending on the practices in your department.
The approved invoice is then sent to the Finance unit,
who will pay the invoice pursuant to section 33.
Keep in mind: you are not allowed to authorize sections 33 and 34
for the same transaction or invoice;
a financial officer will perform section 33.
You are not allowed to authorize section 41 for a contract
and section 34 related to the same contract;
a procurement officer will perform section 41.
You are not allowed to authorize any transaction
for which you may be perceived as having a personal benefit.